Looking forward: A Doctorate Program
====================================

Categories
:   Personal
Tags
:   education
CreateTime
:   2014/05/28 23:50:48
PostDate
:   Never
Identifier
:   chapman

So a bit of some personal news --- I'm excited to announce that I have decided
to accept an offer to the Computational and Data Science Doctoral Program at
[Chapman University][chapman] in California.  I came to this decision after a
decently long period of delibration and thinking things over, and weighting
opportunities at Chapman against my other offers.  However, having just
finalized everything this week, I am in my choice of Chapman as my home for my
doctoral studies in the upcoming years.

There are two main aspects to my decision --- why computational science, and
why Chapman?

[chapman]: http://www.chapman.edu/

Why Computational Science?
--------------------------

For the first few years of my journey in higher education, I had always
believed that I belonged in Physics.  Well, all my friends were in Physics and
I didn't really know otherwise.  But even before that, there was so much I had
admired about the beauty of Physics.  The quest for elegance in our
models.  The creation and taming of new mathematics to fit our purposes.
The relentless and ages-long drive to unify everything into a single,
beautiful framework with as few assumptions and axioms as possible, and the
fact that from such simplicity, things weave themselves together to create
such stunning complexity.

It was, in some ways, not too long (and in other ways, not soon enough) before
I realized that I was a little out of place amongst my peers, and (apparently)
a long tradition of physicsists.

I had often remarked that I would have just as much joy in figuring out the
"physics" of a made-up universe --- that the joy was in finding the
mathematical models that would describe it and finding out the implications.

Apparently --- and who knew! --- these days, physicists are driven by a desire
to understand our own physical world.

I looked back on all of the physicists of history who I admired --- Gauss,
Gibbs, Metropolis, Heisenberg --- I admired them for their ability to invent
and draw from new mathematics to tackle their very real problems at hand.  The
fact that Gauss is almost just as popular in Mathematics as he is in Physics
is a true testament to his genius.  And while Gibbs is known for
revolutionizing statistical mechanics and thermodynamics as we know it, I was
more fascinated by the intricate maths that he pioneered and *invented*,
*just* to solve the problems at hand.

Maybe, instead of taming the world, I was more fascinated with taming thought?

Anyways, over the course of the first half of my final year at my
undergraduate university (when I was already, incidentally, working on my
applications to physics doctoral programs), I talked to more and more people
and received a lot of suggestions on what was for me.  I ended up spending
most of my time in the Applied Maths department of my school, and I eventually
stumbled upon [this list][siam], and this field --- "Computational Science".

[siam]: http://www.siam.org/students/resources/cse_programs.php

Really, it seemed to represent everything that I had been interested in and
was pursuing on my own time, for the past year or two.  It represented
everything that interested me in the "real" lab positions and jobs I took.  In
everything I did, I attempted to ask "how much of this problem can I turn into
a problem in computational science?"

The path sort of all clicked together --- in Physics, I was always a bit more
experienced in computation than my Physics peers.  In Computer Science, I was
always a bit more experienced in maths than my CS peers.  My peers were often
times better grounded than me, but I always recognized myself as one of the
few with that unique interdiciplinary blend.  Surely, there were people like
me --- surely I wasn't alone.

And after finding out about Computational Science, as a field...I realized
that I wasn't.

I knew that I could easily and eagerly spend my entire academic career focused
on pioneering new methods and models and theories of computation and applied
maths.  And I knew that it was really what I had wanted to do all along.

In this decision, I sort of was saying goodbye to my first love, Physics.  But
in a way, I really wasn't --- this was the part of Physics that I loved this
entire time, and I am not the first in History to make this choice.  I was
eager to apply all of the intuition and tools and insight that I learned from
studying Physics and finishing a B.S. on it to this field that needed --- more
than any other --- someone who came from exactly that background.  I found my
fit :)




